NOTE: Each individual lesson plan should be written up in its own
document here inside the “Chapter 2” directory. The easiest way to get
started is probably copying from the Lesson Plan Template here:
[*https://drive.google.com/open?id=1bByrJ2s2cKh-h6XvSFkFz91xCiSmW4rejz1gSbmM6pw*](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1bByrJ2s2cKh-h6XvSFkFz91xCiSmW4rejz1gSbmM6pw)

This document can serve as a table of contents/guide to the lessons in
this section, with a bit of preceding documentation on what to expect
from the lesson plans.

**Working structure for this chapter document**

-   Introduction/how we’ve grouped these lessons

-   What you’ll find inside a lesson plan

-   MVP curriculum -- suggested set of lessons to get a newsroom
    > started?

-   Lessons

<!-- -->

-   Threats to understand

    -   

-   Things you can do to improve your personal security

    -   Basic

        -   

    -   Advanced

        -   

-   Things your newsroom can do to improve institutional security

    -   

LESSONS and LINKS

[***Connected App
Hygiene***](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ubihg-KeA-NGh7WvVOwOCuOo85PGg8bxn6RuvhTiaNM):
10 minutes, group activity

In this lesson, participants will learn how to check which third-party
applications have access to their Gmail, Twitter, Facebook, and Github
accounts.

[***Digital
Literacy***](https://docs.google.com/document/d/19T_bl3iXRv-slGxFGAbMc0mHse_JN8_e05vzJ-vVpUk):
This is an overview of basic concepts for digital literacy: what is a
network, what is encryption, what is authentication, what is a computer?

[***Games &
Activities***](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1GjvdLxs0EPhCNHNrq7f7uz-hcRMOAmiaQReUYOkuyvI):
These are examples of games and activities for groups to learn about key
concepts, such as how cell phone towers work.

[***How to Set Up
Signal***](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1cP1aELuoi2sbGkgvheX8Vhsj3Hg3RAySs-Gs03Bw-tU):
15-30 minutes, walkthrough and group activities

In this lesson, participants should have already locked down their
mobile device and are now ready to install a secure messaging system
called Signal. They will install Signal, learn how to review their
setting for maximum protection, and practice messaging other users. This
lesson is intended to be taught third, following Mobile Applications
Security Settings (first) and Locking Down Your Mobile Device (second).

[***Locking Down Your Mobile
Device***](https://docs.google.com/document/d/17wZNXEMwmpNQVq55Jq02jyjYEPmLyhcS0ytQHAsRbNc):
20-30 minutes, demonstration and walkthrough

In this lesson, participants will learn how to “lock down” their mobile
device by creating a secure passcode for unlocking the phone and
preparing the device for installation and use of a secure messaging
system. This lesson should be paired with Mobile Applications Security
Settings (first) and How to Set Up Signal (third).

[***Mobile Applications Security
Settings***](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1UBN6Xri5Lz-hCoWS1YieAIgTeH75jt19RZofQCC1xdA):
20-30 minutes, demonstration and walkthrough

In this lesson, participants will review the permissions they have
granted to third-party applications on their mobile device. They will
also learn to consider how applications may be using their data and
different aspects of their mobile device (location services, microphone,
camera).

[***Passwords and
2FA***](https://drive.google.com/open?id=18WHq-2e8_F6vYwkOazQeXqcTLUmB9y_eeLlq27c3J-U):
60-90 minutes, workshop and walkthrough

In this lesson, participants will learn how to protect their online
accounts by choosing a secure password, apply that password to their
primary email account, and enable two-factor authentication.

[***Phishing
Basics***](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1Y8-HNr3fen-trxzlMbutiCqHZiV1OJqfIdFTAlkzv3Q):
45 minutes, workshop

In this lesson, participants will be asked to develop a stronger
awareness of phishing and spear-phishing attacks. They will learn how
these attacks work, including different techniques attackers may use.
This workshop will teach basic safety techniques and introduce tools
that may reduce the probability of being attacked.

[***Physical Custody and Disk
Encryption***](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1TP32QtkQGqR1xDRn5wn7OOEkTKDl0Bg_A9ZtgFP0wvI):
**TK minutes**, workshop

In this lesson, participants will learn strategies for protecting their
devices and data in the event of temporary and permanent custody loss
situations (Officials taking a device at the border versus a laptop
being stolen). Trainer will discuss risks associated with various
scenarios and introduce strategies for mitigating many of those risks.

[***Pre-training Survey for Trainers and
Newsrooms***](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1-Fss4doRtbCfX1jgLVEUm4qPcKqtkW38UxIJEhzY5V0):
60-90 minutes, interview-style

This resource is for trainers to engage with the newsroom leadership and
IT leadership before developing the training and workshops. This allows
the trainer to get the lay of the land, learn about the technology
infrastructure in place, and see how the key leadership teams are
communicating.

[***Scrubbing Metadata: a low-fi
method***](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1MS9MoeXmXw_TYOmjXto9mvg-EROL5vds2sl5zytQTZk):
30 minutes, small group discussion and partner activity

In this lesson, participants will be introduced to the concept of
metadata for document and image files. The trainer will lead a short
discussion about why journalists would want to strip out sensitive
metadata and why sources may give journalists documents and image files
that have the metadata removed. Participants will then work in pairs to
practice removing metadata from a document and an image file.

[***Secure Tip
Pages***](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1qo-GeMES_W0CQiqqr4wkgaXiX9_9n-J3oXEvKMiH4bU):
60+ minutes, intended for leadership or administrators

In this lesson, trainers are able to help a news organization set up a
secure tip page, or a resource for sources who may want to leak
confidential information with the newsroom. This lesson includes how to
contact a newsroom, tips for sources for maintaining their own
anonymity, and discusses common secure channels and their various
tradeoffs.

[***Training Newsrooms on Two-Factor
Authentication***](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1LrFfI1Y18U4eTCiDMZ0Lz1Cc4wwK8tkVJWbZ6ZRMYYo):
TK minutes, workshop and walkthrough

In this lesson, participants will be introduced to three types of
multi-factor authentication: SMS, authentication apps, and security
keys. Trainers will discuss the relative merits of each method and
provide a demonstration for setting up each type.
