This is a wip on how to give people a grounding it the basics of digital
literacy, written in the order I have found works best ime (will be
updating through the evening)

\# Intro/framing

\# What is a Networks

\# What is Encryption

\# What is Authentication

\# What is a Computer (& What is Software)

Framing: This is \_awesome\_

Suggested intro: (Customize it, bring in some of your favorite
properties of the net, etc.)

Practical privacy and security is just a part of digital literacy. Right
now, for most people, learning how their computers work seems hard
enough, learning how the network works seems impossible. But it’s not,
it’s just learning a new perspective about the world we live in
everyday.

It's worthwhile to take a moment to say how amazing the age we live in
is, how wonderful and awesome it is, and downright magical it is, living
through the mediation of just about everything. When I was young we
didn’t have 30 second access to all human knowledge, now I can't
tolerate being out of touch with the world for more than a few hours. We
used to go to the library to find things out. When someone moved away,
we accepted that we'd probably never see from or hear from them again.
The lives of people in distant lands, or even Des Moines, was
mysterious.

Now, if I want to talk to hundreds, or even thousands, of people, I turn
to my twitter client. If I wanted to do that when I was a teenager, I
just couldn’t. I could work for years to get onto a platform with that
kind of reach, but that was a career choice -- go to college, try to get
a job, work for it, possibly for most of my life. Now it's a regular
part of life, normal and even banal.

There's more books than I could hope to read, much less own, that fit on
my three-inch screen. Or, I can realize reading on a 3" screen sucks,
and listen to audiobooks, of which there are more than I could ever
listen to -- even in the public domain, having been read by random
volunteers! Thanks, random volunteers!

I can book a flight to Seoul, order a box of baby chickens, and find
patient communities for dozens of bowel diseases in the span of 20
minutes, all from this magical phone in front of me, or this small box
with more computational power that took humanity to the moon.

We live in an age of working magic wands, an age with no muggles. We’re
all wizards now -- but there's no Hogwarts. We're muddling through, and
everyone having all these powers can seem scary. But the world gets
better as we all learn to use them.

This is digital literacy, getting a sense of your networks. Learning how
to use your network powers, and how to defend yourself in an environment
of network powers.

Let's start at the beginning: What is a network?

\# What is a network

define for trainer -- A network is two or more nodes connected
physically and informationally over time.

how to teach network

What do networks see when they look at you?

examples: Path data for cellphones

Electrical grids

Social graphs

Road systems

John Snow's cholera map

Packet switching diagram

Think about what a network sees when it sees you. On some you look like
a billing point, little more than an amount of money owed, with a
individual ID number. On some you look like a series of paths: think
about cell phone towers and ATM withdrawals. In a medical network, you
look like a series of diagnoses, vital statistics, and a place where
medical professional time and drugs vanish. That’s what the you-shaped
hole in that network looks like. To the electrical grid your house looks
like a point where power vanishes and money comes out. On a smart grid,
that portrait is a little more complex. What do you look like on a phone
network? You look like data, metadata, and paths from tower to tower.
Time stamps, locations, and connections out to nodes on the internet
tell the story of your day, and much of your life.

Network surveillance is often vital to make our lives good and healthy,
or to simply build this. Most surveillance, good or bad, is built on how
networks operate on the physical level. They're not nefarious, they're
physics.

We live with and in networks every minute of every day. These networks
lay over each other and touch all over the place. Once we start thinking
about them, what they’re shaped like, where we are in them, our
contemporary world starts to make more sense.

The net is a packet switching network. Packet switching is rather like
passing notes in class, you hand the note to someone near you, who tries
to hand it to someone closer to the person it's intended for. To know
where to pass the note, a person has to know who it's going to, and they
know who gave it to them. This knowledge is called metadata: the data a
network needs to function.

exercises

cell phone exercise (Marco Polo Is a very interesting historical
figure/Ping Pong is a game with two people)

passing notes in class

\# What is Encryption

\# What is Authentication

Note: this is covered well in Passwords

\# What is a Computer (& What is Software)
