Scrubbing Metadata from Files- A low-fi approach
================================================

## Overview FIX Files such as Word documents and JPEG images usually
contain information about the systems used to create them. This
information, commonly referred to as metadata, could inadvertently
reveal personally identifiable details about your sources to anyone
given access to the files. It’s important to remove metadata from files
provided by sources before sharing or publishing them.

(Additional Bonus! Being aware of what kind of metadata exists --and how
to find it-- also gives you a leg up as a reporter when researching and
developing evidence and leads for stories.)

A good rule of thumb is to only share the minimum amount of information
necessary to tell a story - in the most extreme case, for example,
simply cutting and pasting document text into a plaintext file
effectively removes all digital metadata.

There are many applications for removing file metadata, but a simple
approach is to print out a sensitive document, scan it back into your
computer and rename the file. Similarly, you can remove metadata from an
image or photograph by screenshotting the original and sharing the copy
only. (Note that color printers may add nearly-invisible metadata to
printed pages as an anti-counterfeiting measure - printing documents in
black and white reduces the chance of exposure.)

**When would you use this technique?**

Journalists may wish to have an outside expert review information leaked
by sensitive sources, but want to maintain the anonymity of their source
to the third party. Similarly, many news organizations publish documents
alongside their coverage and may not want to make their source
information public.

Even for documents not shared outside the newsroom, removing metadata
before sharing with colleagues reduces the risk of an accidental or
malicious leak of source information..

Redaction of information within documents may be necessary before
distribution, and it’s important that this be done irreversibly. Some
document formats include revision histories, others may still contain
text that has been graphically obscured. Metadata scrubbing techniques
work well here too. More sophisticated methods of watermarking
documents, such as graphical watermarks or typographical variations may
also require a reconstruction of the document be made for publication,
as the risk of publishing even the redacted original would be too great.

**ABOUT THIS LESSON PLAN**

**Review date:** June 5 2017

**Lesson duration:** 30 minutes

**What will participants learn?**

Basic understanding of what metadata is and basic techniques to “clean”
common file formats before publishing or sharing. This session does
\*not\* cover myriad other types of metadata, most notably the metadata
created by journalists and sources when they browse the web, use their
mobile phones, or communicate using VoIP, chat, email, etc.

**What materials will participants need?**

Email access, a laptop, access to printer and scanner

**How should participants prepare?**

Download the exercise materials beforehand. (See Scrubbing Metadata
subfolder)

**What materials will the instructor need?**

Example document (like a PDF or Word document), example image (.jpg or
similar format) both with identifying metadata included -- such as the
name of the Microsoft license-holder, geotag/location data, etc.

**LESSON PLAN**

**Icebreakers/activities**

Did you know that sharing and publishing files can burn your sources?

Example: Vice and John McAfee:
[*https://www.vice.com/en\_us/article/john-mcafee-bath-salts-belize-murder-fugitive-gregory-faull*](https://www.vice.com/en_us/article/john-mcafee-bath-salts-belize-murder-fugitive-gregory-faull)

When Vice published the story, the photos still had location data
included and basically burned their source.

Example: [*How The Intercept Outed Reality
Winner*](http://blog.erratasec.com/2017/06/how-intercept-outed-reality-winner.html)
- Reality Winner used traditional mail, not the Internet, to share
documents with the Intercept, but was caught due to both operational
security mistakes and metadata included in the printed files she shared.

**Walkthrough or Active Lesson**

Trainer should begin by introducing participants to the concept of
document metadata by showing multiple examples of Word documents, PDF
files and images, showing where to find the metadata and what types of
information may be “hidden” in a document’s guts.

Microsoft Word example:

![](media/image2.png)

**How to find Properties on Microsoft Word, Microsoft Excel, Microsoft
PowerPoint (are these different on Mac and PC?): **

**How to find metadata of Google documents: **

How to view EXIF data on an image file:

![](media/image4.png)

**How to find EXIF data on an image file (both for PC and Mac -- do not
assume the user has access to Photoshop or other paid software). **

**Scenario:** How do you share SOOPERSEKRIT.docx with a 3rd party
without exposing the information in the document properties? How do you
share MADSCIENTISTLAIR.jpg without giving away the GPS coordinates
embedded in the image EXIF data?

5-10 minute small group discussion: ask participants to brainstorm ideas
of ways they could share or publish the sensitive information. Have each
small group report back and see if anyone came up with the idea to
retype a document, print and scan, or utilize screenshots. (Spend some
time talking about other solutions that come up.)

10 minute activity: Trainer should send an image file that has location
data and a Word document with ownership or similar information stored.
Have participants partner together, one pretending to be the journalist
with the sensitive information, the other pretending to be a third-party
expert in the subject area who is going to review the sensitive
documents. In the second half of the exercise, one person should be a
sensitive source with a photo to leak and the other should be a
journalist who is going to receive a “scrubbed” image.

-   The “journalist” should print out the document and use a scanner or
    > mobile application to ingest the document and share. (If the
    > “journalist” uses a color printer, the trainer should verify that
    > they printed the document in monochrome.)

-   The “source” should make a screenshot of the original file and send
    > the scrubbed version to the “journalist.”

Follow-up, other tools
======================

\[ needs more context on when you’d use other tools… list of software
options…TK \]

[*Protecting Your Sources When Releasing Sensitive
Documents*](https://source.opennews.org/articles/how-protect-your-sources-when-releasing-sensitive-/)
- a checklist for handling and releasing leaked documents

For consideration:
