How to Set Up Signal
====================

**Overview:** Signal is a secure messaging platform that utilizes
end-to-end encryption. Because participants have already secured their
phones in previous two lessons (mobile application settings review and
secure lockscreens), their device is now ready to use with a program
like Signal.

Benefits of Signal include the fact that they do not store the messages
on their servers, participants can set their conversations to
“self-destruct,” and users can customize what information (contact name,
message preview) is available on the lockscreen of the mobile device.

This training module is intended to be taught as the third in a series,
following **Mobile app security settings** and **Locking down your
mobile devices**.

**ABOUT THIS LESSON PLAN**

**Review date:** June 6, 2017

**Lesson duration:** 15-30 minutes (this lesson is meant to be taught as
the third in a series on securing mobile devices for a total 60-75
minute training block).

**What will participants learn?**

Participants will learn why secure messaging through a program like
Signal is important and easy to set up. They will install Signal, learn
how to set and review their privacy settings, learn how to verify safety
numbers, set up a group chat, and share a photo.

**What materials will participants need?**

Smartphone: iPhone or Android

**Level:** beginner

**Preconditions:** This lesson is the third in a series, following
mobile applications security settings review, creating a lock screen,
and setting up device encryption.

**How can the trainer prepare**?

Two excellent resources on how and why journalists are moving to Signal
are
[*here*](https://medium.com/@mshelton/signal-for-beginners-c6b44f76a1f0#.5nbt1bfp9)
and
[*here*](https://theintercept.com/2016/07/02/security-tips-every-signal-user-should-know/).
This lesson draws from both.

**LESSON PLAN**

How to set up Signal -- encrypted messaging and calls 
------------------------------------------------------

**For iOS:**

Open the App Store and search for “Signal Private Messenger Open Whisper
Systems.” Select the Signal app, install it, and open it.

![](media/image8.png){width="1.2876257655293089in"
height="2.2916666666666665in"}![](media/image9.png){width="1.2916666666666667in"
height="2.291170166229221in"}

1)  You will be prompted to confirm your device and phone number.

![](media/image13.png){width="1.6372670603674542in"
height="2.9114588801399823in"}

2\) Next, the system will send you a six-digit verification code

![](media/image11.png){width="2.4895833333333335in"
height="2.2941557305336833in"}![](media/image14.png){width="1.6953718285214348in"
height="3.026042213473316in"}

3\) You’ll know that you’ve set it up correctly with the Welcome! popup.
You may choose to allow Signal to access your contacts and send you
notifications, but it does not need access to your contacts to work. If
you’d prefer to use it to communicate without having contact information
stored in your phone’s contacts, choose “Don’t Allow” and proceed.

![](media/image12.png){width="1.890625546806649in"
height="2.16865813648294in"}![](media/image10.png){width="2.338542213473316in"
height="2.6961165791776027in"}

**Android users:**

Open the Play Store and search for “Signal Private Messenger Open
Whisper Systems.” Select Signal, then choose **Install** and **Accept**
to install Signal. Choose **Open** to start Signal for the first time.

You will be prompted to confirm your device and phone number. Signal
will send a 6-digit access code to the number you provide, and
automatically verify it.

Next, you’ll be asked to set up profile information. You can choose to
enter your name and specify an avatar, or you can skip this step

You’ll be asked to make Signal your default SMS app. This is optional,
but recommended. The more people that use Signal, the less of a red flag
raised by the use of encrypted messaging in general.

You can choose to import your existing SMS message database. Once again,
this is optional.

**Additional privacy and security settings **

IPhone users: tap the white settings gear in the upper left corner to
access privacy settings for Signal. Android users: tap the three-dot
icon in the upper right corner, choose **Settings**, and choose
**Privacy**.

-   In the Privacy screen, you can see and change:

    -   -   Who you’ve blocked

    -   Decide whether or not to show Signal previews when you switch
        > apps (Signal shows up as a blue logo screen, instead of
        > showing a preview of what’s inside the app)

    -   iOS only: Decide whether or not you want Signal calls to be
        > integrated with iOS calls (show on lock screen, show caller’s
        > name and number, show in the phone’s call history)

    -   Decide whether or not to relay calls through Signal’s server to
        > avoid revealing your IP address to the person on the other end
        > (which can reveal your location)

    -   You can also clear all history logs in Signal (all messages,
        > attachments, call history)

    -   Decide whether or not to enable read receipts

-   In the Notifications tab, you can select whether or not to show the
    > sender’s name and message, just the sender’s name, or no name or
    > message in your push notifications.

You can also decide whether or not, and for how long, to keep messages
from a specific person. This setting exists on a conversation by
conversation level.

-   Click on the person’s name in your conversation, which will bring
    > you to the contact information and conversation settings.

-   There you can enable a setting called “Disappearing Messages,” which
    > allows messages to disappear after they have been read. You can
    > set the timer to any length from 5 seconds to 1 week.

**ACTIVITY**: 10-15 minutes

-   Ask participants to pair up with a neighbor and have them exchange
    > phone numbers.

-   They can practice finding a contact on Signal, sending a message,
    > setting it to disappear, and verifying that it was sent securely.
    > (On Android devices, they will see a lock icon and a pair
    > of checkmarks. On iPhones, messages will simply display the word
    > “sent” and “delivered”)

-   Each participant should practice clicking on their contact’s name in
    > a conversation, and choosing **Verify Safety Number**. This allows
    > both parties to verify the security of the end-to-end encryption.
    > Each conversation between two users has a unique safety number.
    > You can verify by checking the series of numbers displayed by each
    > phone and/or by each scanning the QR code displayed.

    -   If users were not in the same space, they could check the
        > verification numbers using a separate channel, such as a phone
        > call, imessage, Facebook message, Twitter DMs, etc.

<!-- -->

-   When composing a message, users can click the paperclip icon to
    > attach photos, videos, gifs, and documents.

    -   IPhone users can additionally enable access to Dropbox and
        > Google Drive

    -   Android users will see a camera icon in addition to the
        > paperclip icon

    -   Sending attachments through Signal is secure and encrypted, and
        > does not automatically save a copy to the mobile device.

-   Partner pairs should then pair with a second group to create a group
    > chat and continue practicing sending secure messages.

    -   To create a group chat, click the **Compose** icon, then select
        > the **Group** icon (it looks like multiple little people and a
        > plus sign on iPhones). \[\[it is different for Android\]\]

    -   Name the group chat, then add multiple contacts.

    -   Each person in the group will get a notification that you have
        > added them, but they will not know the identities of the other
        > members in a group and they will not know what you have named
        > the group.

        -   Note: you cannot delete a group once you have created it,
            > but each member can leave the group at any point.

WRAP UP and CONCLUSION:

Remind participants that each conversation is only secure as the most
insecure member of the conversation. Signal is a tool that has good
options to protect both sides, but if a journalist is using Signal with
a source who doesn’t have a secure passcode or has left the settings to
show contact names in the lock screen, that journalist is still at risk.

Similarly, the journalist should take as many steps and precautions a
possible to protect their sources by encouraging their sources to read
guides on using Signal (such as this one, or the ones linked for
trainers above).

Recommended reading
-------------------

https://theintercept.com/2017/05/01/cybersecurity-for-the-people-how-to-keep-your-chats-truly-private-with-signal/
